When you're reading the Bible, try to get the whole picture.
Now, we'll use a couple of well-known Bible accounts
to illustrate.
Have you been raised in a step family or a blended family?
If you have, did you know that you have something in common
with Joseph, the son of Jacob?
Joseph was raised with 10 half-brothers
in a large blended family.
So, now you want to try to view this family as a composite.
You want to try to figure out how did people mesh
or how did they clash within this family?
What would you do?
Well, you might start by writing down some of the characteristics
of the individual members of the family.
What about Joseph's half-brothers and Joseph himself?
What do you know about them?
What about Judah?
Simeon.
Levi.
Dan.
Nathalie.
What do you know?
So write down their characteristics
and try to figure out how they might get along.
Sometimes there is one individual incident
that's recorded in the Bible.
But we mustn't forget.
People's actions have a way of affecting other people.
So when you read about a certain incident in the Bible,
try to imagine who might have been affected
by that incident.
Take an example.
In the book of Genesis,
we read that Jacob's son Ruben committed sexual immorality
with Bilha.
Well, that had an effect on other people without doubt.
Who was Ruben?
He was Leah's oldest son.
Who was Bilha, Rachel's handmaiden.
Do you think that there might have been a little animosity
or tension between Leah and Rachel sometimes,
especially when you consider how their marriage
has started out?
There may have been.
And it may be that the attitudes of the women
had some bearing on the attitudes of their sons as well.
So you take all of these things into consideration.
Now Bilha had two sons, Dan and Nathalie.
How do you think they felt when they learned
that their oldest brother or half brother
had committed fornication with their mother?
So there could have been tension there.
And this all goes into the mix
when we're considering the family as a composite.
Now, do you picture Joseph at age 17
with 10 much older half brothers,
maybe in their 30s?
Some old enough to be his father?
Not true.
The truth is that there was only a seven-year age difference
between Joseph's oldest brother, Ruben,
and Joseph himself.
In fact, 11 of Jacob's sons were born during the seven-year period
when Jacob was working for Laben.
11 sons in seven years?
How is that possible?
Easy.
When you remember that Jacob had two wives
and two concubines or secondary wives.
So they didn't have to be a nine-month interval
between the birth of the children.
In fact, some could have been born just about at the same time.
They could have been the same age.
So when Joseph was sold into slavery at age 17,
his oldest brother was no more than 24.
Some of his brothers were only a year or two
older than Joseph himself.
So we're talking about a group of young men
in their late teens and early 20s.
And this might explain some of the hot-headed reactions
that some of those young men had.
Well, so much for the boys.
What about their father, Jacob?
What can we learn about him?
A lot.
For one thing, he was a spiritual man.
And this is something for you young brothers and sisters
who were contemplating marriage to think about.
Jacob was willing to go to any length
to keep his relationship with Jehovah intact.
Let's take an example.
Genesis chapter 29 and verse 18.
You can follow along on the screen as I read this.
And we're talking about marriage here.
Genesis 29, 18, it says,
Jacob had fallen in love with Rachel.
So he said, I am willing to serve you seven years
for your younger daughter, Rachel.
Now, what's the takeaway?
Jacob didn't marry the first person who came along.
Maybe some pagan woman.
He didn't say, well, seven years is too long to wait.
I'm going to find some Philistine woman, not marry her.
He was willing to wait so that he could marry someone
who would join him in the worship of Jehovah.
And you young folks, if you are willing to wait,
you can be sure that you will have Jehovah's blessing
as well.
Now, Jacob was apparently also a bit of a romantic.
Notice verse 20.
It says, and Jacob served seven years for Rachel.
But notice this.
But in his eyes, they were like just a few days
because of his love for her.
Isn't that poetic?
Jacob may have learned to treasure his wife
by observing his parents, Isaac and Rebecca.
It appears that they had a strong marriage.
I just noticed what we read at Genesis 26 and verse 8.
Genesis 26 and verse 8.
It says, after some time had passed,
a Bimolec king of the Philistines was looking out of the window
and he saw Isaac, that's Jacob's father,
displaying affection for Rebecca his wife.
So it appears that Isaac and Rebecca
had a warm relationship, a good marriage.
Now, what else can we learn about Jacob?
There's an interesting detail recorded in chapter 25
and verse 27.
It says, as the boys got bigger,
Isaac, Jacob's brother, became a skilled hunter,
a man in the field,
but Jacob was a blameless man dwelling in tents.
So Jacob liked to dwell in tents.
That might explain the strong bond that developed
between Jacob and Joseph,
who was his youngest for many years.
Now, although Jacob liked to dwell in tents,
he was by no means a sissy.
He was a strong man,
but he was a spiritual man.
That's something for your young brothers to take away.
You want to be strong, we know you do,
but spirituality should come first.
One time, spiritual Jacob gave his sons a beautiful lesson
on how to settle a difference with a family member.
We read about it at Genesis chapter 32
and I think all of us can learn from his example.
We learned at Genesis 32
that Jacob's brother Esau was coming to see him.
Now, they hadn't seen each other for 20 years
and to say that their parting had been difficult
is an understatement.
The fact is that when they separated more than 20 years earlier,
Esau had vowed that one day he was going to kill his brother.
Now, he was coming to see him.
Now, why was he so angry with Jacob?
It's because Jacob had received a blessing from their father
and Esau was not happy.
So Esau arrives and 400 men are with him.
Why 400 men?
Well, the Bible doesn't say,
but it could be that he was trying to show how important
and prominent he had become.
How did Jacob react?
Did he try to go tit for tat?
Did he try to show how important and prominent he had become
with all of the blessings he'd received?
Did he reopen old wounds?
Did he argue with his brother?
Did he say, you know, I was right all along
and you Esau, you have been wrong?
Did he demand an apology?
No.
There was a lot that Jacob could have bragged about.
No question about that.
There was no doubt that Jacob had Jehovah's blessing.
Early on, we read that an angel of Jehovah had appeared to him
and said, I am Jehovah, the God of Abraham, your father
and the God of Isaac, the land on which you are lying,
to you I am going to give it and to your offspring.
I am with you and I will safeguard you wherever you go.
I will not leave you.
Well, that's quite a blessing, isn't it?
But there's more.
For a portion of the previous night,
that is, the night before Esau and Jacob met up,
Jacob had wrestled with an angel and as a result,
he had managed to receive another blessing.
But Jacob didn't flaunt his blessings.
Instead, he humbled himself.
In fact, he even bowed down seven times before his brother
in front of his wives and his 11 sons.
So Jacob settled any lingering difference with Esau,
not with his fists, not with a bragging tongue,
not with a weapon, but humbly,
like a real man, like a real spiritual man.